CS130 Project 3 - Design Document
=================================

Please answer all questions in this design document.  Note that the final
feedback section is optional, and you are not required to answer it if you
don't want to.

Unanswered or incompletely answered questions, or answers that don't actually
match the code/repository, will result in deductions.

Answers don't have to be deeply detailed!  We are mainly looking for an
overview or summary description of how your project works, and your team's
experiences working on this project.

Logistics (7 pts)
-----------------

L1.  [2pts] Enumerate all teammates here.
     Jacob Acosta, Sebastian Lamas, Cecilia Noble, Julia Gao


L2.  [2pts] What did each teammate focus on during this project?
     Jacob: Moving and copy cells function
     Cecilia: Implementing moving formula in copy_cell and absolute/relative location
     Sebastian: Absolute/relative location
     Julia: Moving and copy cells function and implementing moving formula in copy_cell


L3.  [3pts] Approximately how many hours did each teammate spend on the project?
     Each individual spent about 15 hours.


Spreadsheet Engine Design (9 pts)
----------------------------------

D1.  [3pts] Moving and copying regions of a sheet are very similar operations,
     with only a few differences between them.  How did your team take advantage
     of the similarity of these two operations to reduce the amount of code
     required to provide this functionality?
     We took advantage of this by only writing one helper function which performed
     both operations.  We passed in a boolean to check if it was moving cells as any 
     cells that previously had contents was set to be an empty cell. The boolean was
     set to true for moving cells and set to false for copying cells. The rest of
     the function was performed for both operations.


D2.  [3pts] Similarly, moving/copying regions of a sheet, and renaming a sheet,
     both involve formula updates.  Was your team able to factor out common
     aspects of these two operations to reduce the amount of code required to
     implement these operations?  If so, what did you do?  If not, why not?
     We were able to factor out a common aspect of these two operations by using
     the same class to print out our formulas once we changed the formula tree in place.
     We added an extra class called FormulaMover() that is able to move the formula
     to the correct cell based on the offset. Then we return the formula tree
     and print out the formula using the same class FormulaPrinter() we used to
     print out formulas after renaming a sheet.


D3.  [3pts] How does your implementation address the challenges of moving or
     copying a region of cells where the source and target regions overlap?
     We address these challenges by iterating either forward or backward through
     the region of the cells that are being copied or moved. If we are moving or copying
     the cells to the right, we loop though the cells backward so that we only
     replace values of the cells that have been copied over for both the row and column.
     If we are moving or copying the cells to the left, we loop through the cells
     the forward direction so that we only replace values of the cells that have been 
     copied over for both the row and column. We check which direction we are moving
     by using if the offset (difference between the to_location and start_location)
     is positive or negative.

Static Code Analysis / Code Linting (16pts)
-------------------------------------------

L1.  [5pts] The Project 3 spec includes an example of a subtle implementation
     bug with the Python counts(s, totals) function as written in the spec.
     Briefly describe the cause of the buggy behavior, and what is the
     recommended approach for avoiding the buggy behavior.
     The cause of the buggy behavior is that the value of a default argument is evaluated 
     only once, when the function is declared. The default argument syntax totals = {} causes 
     the Python interpreter to create an empty dictionary, but it’s the same dictionary 
     object every time the function is called. The dictionary is not being cleared 
     before calling the function again so the new call to this function just adds more
     to the dictionary. One way to approach this is to create an empty dictionary 
     (like shown below):

     def counts(s: str, totals: None) -> Dict[str, int]:
          if totals is None:
               totals = {}
          for ch in s:
               totals[ch] = totals.get(ch, 0) + 1
          return totals


L2.  [4pts] What code-linter did your team use on your project?  Why did you
     choose it?  Was this the first CS130 project in which you used a linter?
     We used ruff as our code-linter since it was suggested in the spec. This 
     is the first project in which we used a linter.


L3.  [3pts] How did you automate the execution of your code linter?  Did
     everyone in your team find it easy to run?
     We automated the execution of our linter by adding it in Github actions. Whenever
     we commit or make a pull request from Github, the linter is being run to test our code to
     make sure there is no buggy behavior. Everyone in our team found it easy to run.
     

L4.  [4pts] Did the use of the linter improve your overall code quality and
     correctness?  Give some specific details in your answer.  Were there any
     serious issues (e.g. buggy language idioms) you were unaware of?
     Yes. The linter improved our overall code quality and correctness. Most
     of the issues were using '==' instead of 'is' and some syntax issues such
     as location of 'not.' We also had issues with unused variables and needing to 
     be specific in our imports instead of just importing with '*.' There were
     not any serious issues that we were unaware of. 


Performance Improvement (18 pts)
--------------------------------

In this project you must improve the performance of two central areas of your
spreadsheet engine - cell updating and cycle detection.  In the previous project
your team should have written some performance-testing code in preparation for
this effort, and should have run it under a profiler to get an initial sense of
where improvements can be made.  In this project you will follow through on
this investigation, and fix performance issues in your code.

P1.  [7pts] Give a brief overview of 3-4 of the worst hot-spots you identified
     in your performance testing and analysis.  For each one, describe how your
     team was able to resolve it.
     1. Calling cycle detection too many times
     In our link method of graph class, we were previously recomputing cycles everytime the
     link function was called regardless of whether or not the link was already
     in the graph. We fixed this by just adding a check to see if the link was
     in the graph. If it is, we don't need to recompute the cycles again. We
     also updated this in clearing forward and backward links by just checking
     if the cell had links. If it did not, then the graph does not change.

     2. Computing ancestors of graph given cell
     In our get ancestors method of graph class, we were previously popping the
     first element of our queue but that was taking an extra O(n) time since it had to
     go through the whole queue. We instead just did pop() instead of pop(0) which
     optimized our runtime. That way, we just popped the last element of the queue
     which takes less time to compute.

     3. Computing the extent of the spreadsheet after updating cell contents
     In our set cell contents in sheets, we were previously finding the new extent
     by looping through all the cells and then finding the max between each
     to set as our new extent. We were able to reduce the computing time by 
     using a binary search to find the max in the list of locations instead of 
     looping through each cell to find the max. 


P2.  [4pts] Did your team try anything to resolve performance issues and find
     that it didn't improve things at all - perhaps even made things worse?
     If so, were you able to identify why the intended fix didn't produce the
     desired benefit?
     Yes. One thing we tried was batching the notifications together in workbook
     instead of having each cell call notify. The time improvement wasn't really
     noticeable at least using our stress tests, since the stress tests didn't 
     really test the changes. The fix might have been useful if the notification
     call was more complex, so calling it once would be faster than having the
     cell call it once each time it was updated.
     

P3.  [4pts] How do you feel that your performance updates affected your code's
     readability and maintainability?  Did it make it better? worse? unchanged?
     Elaborate on your answer.
     The performance updates helped to make our code better with readability
     as our code become more concise and clear of what the functions were supposed to
     do. The updates didn't really affect maintainability as we fixed certain
     details of functions which didn't have a big impact on how the function is 
     structured.


P4.  [3pts] Did your performance updates cause any regressions in functionality?
     If so, briefly describe any issues that emerged.  How were these issues
     identified (e.g. automated test failures, manual testing, etc.)?  How
     quickly were issues identified?
     No, the performance updates didn't cause any regression in functionality.
     This could be due to that none of the functions functionality was changed. We
     more just optimized certain parts of the code to have a faster runtime. The
     overall structure of our code was not affected by these optimizations.


Section F:  CS130 Project 3 Feedback [OPTIONAL]
-----------------------------------------------

These questions are OPTIONAL, and you do not need to answer them.  Your grade
will not be affected by answering or not answering them.  Also, your grade will
not be affected by negative feedback - we want to know what went poorly so that
we can improve future versions of the course.

F1.  What parts of the assignment did you find highly enjoyable?  Conversely,
     what parts of the assignment did you find unenjoyable?


F2.  What parts of the assignment helped you learn more about software
     engineering best-practices, or other useful development skills?
     What parts were not helpful in learning these skills?


F3.  Were there any parts of the assignment that seemed _unnecessarily_ tedious?
     (Some parts of software development are always tedious, of course.)


F4.  Do you have any feedback and/or constructive criticism about how this
     project can be made better in future iterations of CS130?


